Now that we've talked about
the phases in Java Streams
and we've had a chance to
visualize how they work,
let's talk about the differences
between sequential and parallel
streams.
And you'll see this is one
of the most powerful features
of the Java Streams framework
is the ability to automatically
move from a sequential
processing model
to a parallel processing
model with very
little effort on your part.
So by default, operations in
a stream run sequentially.
All the examples we've looked
at so far either use the of()
method or use the
.stream method.
And that's what we're
going to cover here
in the first several weeks.
It's trivial, however, to
convert a stream to run
in parallel simply by
saying parallel stream,
or .parallel as we'll see
later, instead of saying stream.
Now we're going to cover
parallel streams extensively
later in the course.
But I want to give you a
quick summary of what's
coming so you'll see the big
picture of why Java streams is
so relevant in the context
of parallel functional
programming.
A parallel stream
splits the elements up
into multiple
chunks and then uses
something called the common
fork-join-pool to process
these chunks independently.
And we'll talk at length about
the common fork-join-pool.
But think of it at the
moment as a pool of threads
that very efficiently can
process tasks or subtasks that
are given to it to
run in parallel.
As we'll also see, the reason
for using parallel streams
is that it typically ends up
running much more efficiently
and much more scalability on
modern multicore processors
than simply using a sequential
stream with one thread.
And in fact, we'll take a look
at this SearchStreamGang case
study app over and over
again throughout this course.
And you'll see very quickly that
the sequential versions take
much longer to run than
the parallel versions,
because the parallel
versions, of course,
are able to leverage the
multiple processor cores.
This particular
set of results were
achieved on a quad
core laptop I have
that has 32 gigabytes of RAM.
It's a pretty powerful machine.
And it actually has
eight effective cores,
because each of the cores
in the quad core part
are hyperthreaded.
And I'll talk more about the
configuration a bit later.
Ideally the output of
a behavior in a stream
should only depend on the
arguments it gets as its input.
And this is just a
fancy way of saying
that you don't want
to have behaviors
that have side effects.
You just want them to take their
input and then produce output.
Here's a very simple
example of a method that
abides by those constraints.
This is the capitalize
method that we've been
showing in our Hamlet example.
And as you can see, it
takes a string as input.
And then it goes ahead and
consistently capitalizes
that string.
So the first
character's uppercased,
and all the subsequent
characters are lowercased.
So that's an example
of a method that
has no side effects other than
returning an output, which
isn't really a side effect.
The reason why we're
cautious with side effects
is that behaviors
with side effects
can incur race conditions
when used in parallel streams.
And you may recall
from other discussions
we've had in earlier
courses about concurrency
and synchronization that a race
condition is a bug or a defect
or a hazard that can
arise in software when
an application depends on the
sequence or timing of threads
in order for it to
operate properly.
So we don't want
race conditions.
And one of the easiest ways
to avoid race conditions
is to have behaviors
with no side effects.
Let's take a look at an
example to illustrate
a buggy program that
has side effects that
will cause chaos and insanity
when run in parallel.
This little code
snippet, which you
can find in my ex16 folder
in my GitHub account,
tries to compute
the nth factorial.
And the way it does it is it
makes one instance of a helper
class called Total.
As you can see here,
Total keeps a field
called mTotal,
which is effectively
shared mutable state.
And that's because anytime
the mult method is called,
the mult method will
multiply mTotal by n
and update the value mTotal.
So there's only one
instance of mTotal.
And that instance is
shared by multiple threads.
So that makes it shared mutable
state, because it changes.
Here's what the
program tries to do.
We go ahead and create a stream
of longs between the range of 1
to n inclusively.
That's what the
rangeClosed method does.
And then in
parallel, we're going
to multiply each
of those elements.
And what that's going
to try to do is it's
going to try to update
the mTotal method
in the Total class by
multiplying it by n.
Now, the problem is, when
you run this in parallel,
you'll have multiple
threads simultaneously
updating the value of mTotal.
And that, of course, will
lead to chaos and insanity
in race conditions.
And you'll get very
strange results.
These results occur because
the update to the mTotal field
is not protected by any
kind of synchronizer
or any kind of compare-and-swap
operation or anything.
So it'll end up being corrupted.
There's also other
problems here having
to do with inconsistent
memory visibility.
The bottom line is, this
program is full of bugs.
And this is not the way you
should write parallel code.
So I'm using this as a counter
example of what not to do.
Keep in mind that
only you can prevent
these concurrency hazards.
The compiler won't save you.
The Java execution environment,
or JVM, won't save you.
You have to learn how
to use the parallel
streams processing mechanisms
to do this correctly.
And of course, I'll show
you later how to do this.